Hi, my name is Richard Vogg and I'm happy to be here and talk about how I became a data
composer.
This ability of composing data or creating data from scratch has been increasingly helpful
for me at my last job.
I was working for a data analytics company in Chile for the last years and the client
that we were supporting with analytics was one of the largest banks in the United States.
Similar to a music composer who assembles musical notes and chords into melodies and
songs I started to play around with datasets.
Using R it is very easy to get started, it is fun to get started as many of you might
also have experienced.
For example it is very easy to create a thousand random normally distributed variables and
we can also easily create variables from other distributions like the exponential distribution
or we can create categorical variables by using the sample function.
We can combine all those variables in a data frame and then we have our first in this case
nonsense dataset ready.
And then we can go and take a look at the data and we can check if what we composed
is actually what we wanted to compose, if it makes sense.
So I started to create small melodies, small data melodies in the beginning because it
was fun and later because it was useful.
I used this skill in the business world to improve the communication with non-technical
business partners.
So I created small and easy datasets and visualizations about topics that the business partners felt
comfortable with and used them to explain concepts, explain methods and in general to
create a common ground for discussion and for questions.
When you compose a song for your band it is not enough to have a beautiful melody for
each one of the instruments but you also want them to sound good together.
So in DataWords we do not only want independent variables but we also want them to make some
sort of sense together and I trained that skill and used it a lot because we were working
with sensitive data so you could not just send data to someone else with a question
because not everyone had the same level of access to the data.
And instead I quickly assembled a suitable dataset for each occasion and was able to
ask questions but also to give advice without having to see the real data or having to touch
the real data.
Another application emerged when we had more and more agile projects so we had this aim
of having a working deliverable in each iteration and this was sometimes hard to reach because
we had to wait a lot of time for the data so we had to talk to the data owner, sometimes
request accesses, we had to bring the data into the right format.
And by using a composed dataset that looked like the expected final dataset we could already
start to work on the output, on the report and while we were still waiting for the real
data and in the end we simply replaced that composed dataset with the real dataset and
improved the whole process a lot.
When you want to write a symphony you're not just aligning a few instruments but you have
actually blocks or groups of instruments that have to sound good together and in DataWords
that could be a database where you have several tables that are all connected with each other.
And it is not easy to create a complete database from scratch but we still did it to improve
our internal courses so we wanted to make those courses closer to what we actually work
with and we created a client table, transaction table, account tables and combined all of
them and made this whole database available to everyone in the company, to the internal
courses and also for small prototypes and projects.
All this was about why data composition is important.
Now how to compose with R, there are of course the distributions I already showed in the
beginning how easy it is to work with the distributions and there are also a lot of
functions that can help you to correlate your simulated data to create those connections
between the variables, there are functions that help you to create the relations between
tables and of course there are a lot of packages out there that just wait to be explored that
can support you on your data composition process.
And as I just have a few seconds left I wrote a blog post for each one of those four points,
you can, I invite you to visit my blog and there are a lot more details about those topics
and I hope they might be helpful for you to become a data composer too.
Thank you very much for your attention.